What are the causes of death in males?
The leading cause of death in males
are cardiovascular diseases.
And women know this,
because we women take care
of our men throughout life.
And we also know why they get sick.
A few years ago, through a program
of the Argentinean Heart Foundation,
we conducted a survey
on a representative sample
of 600 women from the metropolitan area
of Buenos Aires,
on the basis of risk factors.
And 80% of the women knew
that conditions such as:
high blood pressure, high cholesterol,
diabetes or smoking,
increase the risk
of cardiovascular disease.
And 90% of respondents
knew that chest pain
is a warning sign of a heart attack.
As well, most of them
had information about
behaviors that help prevent or control
heart disease.
Then, we asked them:
“What is the leading cause
of death in females?”
As you can see, more than half of them
said that cancer is.
Particularly breast cancer.
However, what do women actually die of?
In Argentina, 1 of 3 women
die of cardiovascular diseases.
More deaths than
if we add up the ones from
all types of cancers, accidents and HIV.
This data is collected
by the Ministry of Health,
and shows that, since 2007,
more women than men have died
of cardiovascular disease.
Today, 135 women.
And another one in the next 11 minutes.
I am a cardiologist who, since 2006,
has been committed to fighting
two realities:
The first one: without doubt,
cardiovascular disease
represents a major health issue for women.
The second one: most women
ignore that information
and have a perception
that differs widely from reality.
Cardiovascular disease risk factors,
such as diabetes, high blood pressure,
sedentary lifestyle, stress, overweight;
are the same for both?
It seems so; however,
this is not necessarily true.
If we talk overweight, it is not the same
in women than in men.
In men, fat concentrates in the belly;
whereas in women,
it settles around the hips.
And for the heart, the fat settling
around the hips
may be healthier than abdominal fat.
On the other hand,
the impact risk factors have
also differs by gender.
For example: diabetes.
Diabetes is a risk factor
for both men and women.
If a man has diabetes, the risk of having
a heart attack is 2.6 times higher
than for the one who does not have.
However, a woman with diabetes
is 4 times more likely to have
a heart attack than a woman
who does not have.
The same applies to high blood pressure
or sedentary lifestyle,
both increase the risks of heart attack
much more in women than in men.
On the contrary,
the harmful effects of smoking
are slightly worse in men than in women.
And the third point about risk factors
in women is that
there may be conditions in women alone
that may increase
the risk of heart disease,
that we don't know about.
This is because, in the past,
cardiovascular diseases
were studied only in men.
And extrapolating the results
from men to women
could be a mistake.
Just like studying women
may bring along surprises.
Let me give you an example:
many may have heard that women
of childbearing age are less likely
to suffer illnesses because of the effect
of sex hormones;
a protection that we lose after menopause.
Well, for many years, women were treated
with hormone replacement therapy.
They were treated with hormone patches
as a hormone replacement therapy.
However, only research studies
involving thousands of women
treated with hormone replacement therapy
for many years,
demonstrated that
far from protecting the heart,
it increased cardiovascular risk.
Certainly, what kills us women
is replacement,
and that is a scientific evidence.
But it is a good one, because
it shows that women
need to be studied in particular.
Today, the medicine is fundamentally
based on clinical trials,
and even today, women remain
underrepresented
in research studies.
But this is something we can change.
I can show you data on heart failure,
or any of cardiovascular diseases.
The percentage of women
in research studies,
treated, in this case,
by heart-failure medication,
is less than 30%.
When in fact, if you measure
the entire population
suffering heart failure,
more than half are women.
At the beginning,
I talked about the symptoms
and I'd like to dra
your attention to this:
If the symptoms also differ
between men and women.
And I will talk about heart attack.
The most common heart attack symptom
is chest pain, the squeezing one,
described over 200 years ago by a man
based on direct observation of men,
and read by men.
But there are “atypical” symptoms,
as opposed to the typical,
And those are: back pain, nausea, fatigue,
and a feeling of fullness.
A priori, we could relate “atypical”
with “odd” or “unusual”.
Well, almost half of women
who have a heart attack
have atypical symptoms.
And if the description of the heart attack
had been made over men and women,
the atypical would be identified as
“female”…
The fact is that the challenge entailed
in that typicality of the symptoms,
brings significant consequences.
And that is the case
even when women have typical symptoms,
which can make it difficult to diagnose.
A man enters the emergency room
with a heart attack,
usually saying:
“I have a chest pain, squeezing me
as If I had an elephant's foot
standing in the middle of my chest."
And we all rush. The standard.
But many women describe
the symptoms in a different way.
They use a description associated
with feelings, such as:
“I experience some kind of anxiety,
as if I needed to sigh…"
And so no rush.
Because it’s a more complex description.
And it’s crucial to be very clear
when facing stroke.
Because, when the flow of blood stops,
the artery clogs abruptly
and stops feeding the heart muscle.
And for every minute of delay
in opening up that artery,
the greater the potential damage
to the heart.
And, clearly, higher probability of death.
Every minute counts.
And something that is usually taken
as common sense,
but also demonstrated scientifically,
is that those who felt sick enough
and rushed to the hospital,
are the ones who, when they started
to feel sick realized that
they were having a heart attack.
And the mental picture is facilitated by
the recognition of the early symptoms
and the belief
that what you are experiencing
is possible happen.
And the latter is
only possible if you know
you can get sick.
Let me tell you about Loli.
I met her many years ago
when she was admitted
in hospital with a stroke.
Loli started feeling sick
while in a cab, very close
to the hospital.
But she decided to go home instead
"so as not to worry her husband".
And because she was a teacher
and had to mark exams.
Since she felt, as many women,
that she had
many family responsibilities
that she could not delegate.
And she thought the discomfort
should go away.
Because in the end, she never imagined
that what she way suffering
was having a stroke.
Loli’s case is no exception.
In Argentina, a study demonstrated that,
on average, women ask doctors
2 hours later than men.
What it means less chance of survival.
Another case.
Ana María. She was in her car, stopped
at a traffic light,
when a truck carrying frozen food,
hit the back of her car.
She gets out of the car, somewhat shocked.
No serious injuries though.
When she realizes the damages,
she starts arguing with the truck driver
and as they were arguing,
she starts experiencing chest pain.
Shortly after the ambulance arrived;
she is given a Philadelphia collar
and taken to the hospital
where she kept describing a chest pain.
So to rule out injuries related
to the accident,
she was taken X-rays and CT.
What I say is merely speculative, but
if Ana Maria had been
a man taken to a hospital ER
with symptomatic effects
of hyper-acute stress
for a street accident
and suffering a chest pain,
it is pretty sure that
she would had been referred by the doctors
to undergo an electrocardiography,
to rule out a stroke
before being taken to X-ray.
Thus, having patients delaying
in consulting a physician,
as well as the delays
within the health system,
and the difficulty in making diagnosis
because of this atypicality,
entails that women receive
less treatment for heart attack
in Argentina, but also
in the rest of the world.
And an avoidable consequence is that
the fact that they receive
less treatment explains why,
to some extent, more women
die of a stroke than
men suffering a stroke.
Therefore, it is imperative that we,
the medical and scientific community,
step up clinical research in women
in order to provide and assure them
the best treatment
and health care available.
We have another point and
is related to the community,
to raise awareness.
If you, women and also you men,
are convinced that women
can get heart disease,
this may have two important consequences.
The first one has to do with prevention:
and it is that women
adopt healthy behaviors,
visit a doctor on a regular basis,
and be aware of
their vascular risk factors.
And that men starts taking care
of their women’s heart
just as women care about
our men’s hearts.
And the second outcome is
that women, given the chance
they may have something,
consult a doctor right away,
Because that can save their life.
Months ago,
I was having an after-meal conversation
with friends,
and at that moment, I was working
on an awareness campaign,
and I was very excited about the idea that
a simple campaign can save lives,
but someone told me:
"You can't expect others
to dream your dream."
And I deeply hope he was wrong.
So I ask all of you to please help us,
committing yourself
to spreading this message:
The heart of a woman
may break SERIOUSLY
(Applause)